Trump's move on Wednesday to place stiff new tariffs on imports from nearly all U.S. trading partners marks an all-in bet by the Republican that his once-fringe economic vision will pay off for Americans. It was the realization of his four decades of advocacy for a protectionist foreign policy and the belief that free trade was forcing the United States into decline as its economy shifted from manufacturing to services.

The tariff announcement was the latest and perhaps boldest manifestation of Trump's second-term freedom to lead with his instincts after feeling his first turn in the Oval Office was restrained by aides who did not share his worldview. How it shakes out could be a defining judgment on his presidency. The early reviews have been worrisome. Financial markets had their worst week since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, foreign trade partners retaliated and economists warned that the import taxes may boost inflation and potentially send the U.S.

He has promised that the taxes on imports will bring about a domestic manufacturing renaissance and help fund an extension of his 2017 tax cuts. He insisted on Thursday as the Dow Jones fell by 1,600 points that things were "going very well" and the economy would "boom," then spent Friday at the golf course as the index plunged 2,200 more points.

In his first term, Trump's tariff threats brought world leaders to his door to cut deals. This time, his actions so far have led to steep retaliation from China and promises from European allies to push back. Even some Trump supporters are having their doubts. Frank Amoroso, a 78-year-old resident of Dewitt, Michigan, said he is concerned about short-term rising interest rates and inflation, although he believes the tariffs will be good for the country in the long run. Amoroso, a retired automotive engineer who voted for Trump, said he would give the president's second-term performance a C-plus or B-minus.

Ezra Levin, co-founder of the progressive resistance group known as Indivisible, has been critical of Democratic officials' response in recent weeks to Trump's leadership. But on Friday, he was somewhat giddy about the political consequences for Trump's GOP after the tariffs announcement. "Raising prices across the board for your constituents is not popular," Levin said. "It's the kind of thing that can lead to a 1932-style total generational wipe out of a party."