# Supreme Court overturns Roe v. Wade in landmark abortion decision

The Supreme Court on Friday overturned Roe v. Wade, effectively ending recognition of a constitutional right to abortion and giving individual states the power to allow, limit, or ban the practice altogether. The ruling came in the court's opinion in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, which centered on a Mississippi law that banned abortion after 15 weeks of pregnancy.

The Republican-led state of Mississippi asked the Supreme Court to strike down a lower court ruling that stopped the 15-week abortion ban from taking place.

"We end this opinion where we began. Abortion presents a profound moral question. The Constitution does not prohibit the citizens of each State from regulating or prohibiting abortion. Roe and Casey arrogated that authority. We now overrule those decisions and return that authority to the people and their elected representatives," Justice Samuel Alito wrote in the court's opinion.

Addressing the issue of reliance, the Court stated that such an interest typically arises "where advance planning of great precision is most obviously a necessity." Alito wrote that Casey itself "conceded that those traditional reliance interests were not implicated because getting an abortion is generally 'unplanned activity.'"

Chief Justice John Roberts agreed that the viability line "never made any sense," but said he would have taken "a more measured course" with this case. Rather than overturn Roe v. Wade altogether, Roberts said he would have continued to recognize a right to get an abortion, and that the right should "extend far enough to ensure a reasonable opportunity to choose, but need not extend any further."

The court's majority took a firmer stance against Roe v. Wade and the subsequent case Planned Parenthood v. Casey, holding "that Roe and Casey must be overruled." They countered the Roberts concurrence by claiming that such an approach "would only put off the day when we would be forced to confront the question we now decide."

The ruling states that the Constitution does not confer a right to abortion, and the authority to regulate abortion is "returned to the people and their elected representatives."

The final judgment was reversed and remanded with a 6-3 vote. Justice Alito delivered the opinion of the Court, with Justices Thomas and Kavanaugh filing concurring opinions. Chief Justice Roberts filed an opinion concurring in the judgment. Justices Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan filed a dissenting opinion.