President Donald Trump is stepping up his massive global trade war, a move that's certain to weigh on Americans' wallets and could push the US economy into a painful recession. On Wednesday, Trump declared a national economic emergency and announced tariffs of at least 10% across all countries, with rates going even higher for 60 countries deemed the "worst offenders," according to White House officials. One of the highest tariff rates of 49% will be levied on all Cambodian imports, according to a poster Trump displayed at a Rose Garden event Wednesday.

Perhaps the source of relief from Wednesday's tariff announcement was that Trump didn't go even further than he did. For instance, CNN reported that Trump administration officials were considering imposing a baseline 20% tariff rate for all imports. Trump had also previously said he'd impose 25% tariffs on semiconductors and pharmaceuticals on April 2 on top of reciprocal tariffs.

The tariffs, Trump said, "are going to give us growth." The president has repeatedly touted tariffs as a way to help the US government rely less on income taxes as a main form of revenue. He's even gone as far to say that tariff revenue could replace income taxes entirely. But economists are largely in agreement that tariffs are paid by the country importing the goods, and have historically led to higher prices for consumers. The escalation risks alienating the US further with foes and all the more so with key allies who have been long-time trading partners.

The universal 10% rate will go into effect on April 5, while the customized rates will take effect on April 9, suggesting there could be more room for countries with rates higher than 10% to negotiate.

Countries with higher tariff rates are ones with what Trump referred to as "non-monetary barriers" and "monetary barriers" to trade in addition to tariffs they impose on American good.

The baseline 10% tariff goes into effect on Saturday, one minute after midnight, then any higher tariffs will go into effect on April 9. The new tariffs won't add on to tariffs previously announced on steel, aluminum and cars. The 25% tariff on goods from Mexico and Canada that don't comply with the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement will remain in place until Trump determines that issues around fentanyl and illegal immigration have been resolved.

Senior White House officials said Trump also wants to levy separate tariffs on semiconductors, pharmaceuticals and critical minerals, to be announced at a later date.

Trump's "Liberation Day" announcement did little to clear the dense fog of uncertainty. And even more tariffs by sector are coming down the pike, senior White House officials said Wednesday on a phone call with reporters.

Trump's so-called reciprocal tariffs won't match the ones foreign countries impose on the United States unless a country already had a 10% US tariff. They also won't stack on top of existing duties by sector. "We will charge them approximately half of what they are and have been charging us, so the tariffs will be not a full reciprocal," Trump said from the Rose Garden on Wednesday afternoon.