# Supreme Court Overturns Roe v. Wade

"Roe was egregiously wrong from the start," Justice Samuel Alito wrote in his majority opinion. "Its reasoning was exceptionally weak, and the decision has had damaging consequences. And far from bringing about a national settlement of the abortion issue, Roe and Casey have enflamed debate and deepened division." The vote was 5-4 in favor of overturning Roe.

The ruling concerned Roe v. Wade, which was decided in 1973 and established a constitutional right to abortion before fetal viability (which most experts say occurs now at around 23-24 weeks of pregnancy). This right was reaffirmed in 1992 in Planned Parenthood v. Casey, which established that a regulation cannot place an "undue burden" on the right to abortion.

The case before the Court was Mississippi's Gestational Age Act, passed in 2018 but blocked by two federal courts, which allows abortion after 15 weeks only in medical emergencies or for severe fetal abnormality, with no exception for rape or incest. A district court had blocked the law, holding that it directly violated Supreme Court precedent.

In a joint dissenting opinion, Justices Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan heavily criticized the majority, writing: "With sorrow -- for this Court, but more, for the many millions of American women who have today lost a fundamental constitutional protection -- we dissent."

Chief Justice John Roberts did not join the majority opinion, writing separately that he would have upheld Mississippi's law without completely overturning Roe.

As a result of this decision, abortion rights will now be determined by states, unless Congress acts. At the time of the ruling, nearly half of the states had or were expected to pass laws banning abortion, while others had enacted strict measures regulating the procedure.

President Joe Biden said following the decision that "the health and life of women in this nation are now at risk," calling it "a sad day for the court and for the country." He called for Congress to codify the right to an abortion.